---
# Feel free to add content and custom Front Matter to this file.
# To modify the layout, see https://jekyllrb.com/docs/themes/#overriding-theme-defaults

layout: home
---

<h1>Behind the Screens🎥: Decoding Patterns within the Movie Industry</h1>

Authors: Manos Loukaidis and Nico Sherpa

3, 2, 1... Action! Grab yourself some popcorn and enjoy the movie. The smell of cheese nachos, 2 liter coca cola cups, and 165 minutes pure entertainment. We all love movies, don't we? What do we really like, is it a specific genre, or the multi-million dollar CGI that has been used? With this project, we want to investigate, how we perceive movies given a set of underlying assumption, and subsequently want to learn something about ourselves as humans. When we perceive things in a specific way, and information about that is documented, we can learn not only a lot about the documented industry, but also about societal trends and how we reflect ourselves in the documented data. So let's dive right into it.

<iframe src="genreNetworkGraph.html" width="100%" height="400px" style="border:none;"></iframe>

Our chosen dataset, the [TMDB Movies Dataset](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/asaniczka/tmdb-movies-dataset-2023-930k-movies) contains data of exactly 1,030,001 movies. This data reaches from the title, release data, revenue, to the specifically assigned genres for each movie, and many more categories (24 parameters in total). Above, we can see a network graph, that visualizes all genres that have been assigned to movies, and how they are related to each other (how often they are relatively assigned to movies simultaneously). You can explore them to get a brief sense of the genre distribution.

Let's look a bit deeper into how many movies are assigned to each genre, and how people judged the specific genre differently. In the following plot, the assigned number of movies towards a specific genre, the average rating (average of all movies), as well as a weighted average rating (for each movie the average rating is multiplied with the vote count, summed up and devided by the total vote count per genre; or the average of each single vote per genre).

<iframe src="genreNumberRatingBarplot.html" width="100%" height="600" style="border:none;"></iframe>

The Drama genre has been assigned the most with 214.583k assignments, followed by the Documentary (154.462k) and Comedy(132.107k) genre while only 8.560k movies have been assigned to the Western genre. As we can also see in the Network Graph from the beginning, the Drama genre has relatively many strong ties to other genres like Comedy or Thriller, and due to the fact that many movies have at least a bit 'drama' in their plot, this high occurance is not surprising. What is interesting to see is that there is a very clear difference between the average and weighted average ratings for each genre. However, it makes sense if we assume that better movies are more popular and thus more often voted for in our dataset, consequently having a higher influence on the weighted average rating.

As recent events in the world confirm, humans apparently like war, maybe as they think it might be necessary, maybe because some find it entertaining. Our graph, however, seems to confirm the latter. With an average vote of 7.29 out of 10, the War genre is the highest rated amongst all genres, considering the weighted rating only. The least rated one is the horror genre, which is not surprising if we think that a lot of people consider horror movies to be 'too scary', and the ones that like them might be hard to scare and base their rating on how much they got scared and not on how good the storyline is.

As a take away we can say, that humans love drama, otherwise drama would not be that important for movies. Humans, however, also like what war movies tickles in them, which is brutality, proudness, thrill of battle, but also to be able to distinguish between good and also to be secure in a comfortable home at the same time. We get a grasp of the excitement of war while not having to bear the risk to die. It might be interesting to see, in which other fields than movies we can observe these essential human traits. This might give us tremendous insights into what we like, what we want to gain out of something, and how humans can get influenced.

Next it would be nice to observe the included movies per Genre over the time to get some insights here.

<iframe src="time_series_movie_count.html" width="100%" height="600" style="border:none;"></iframe>

The Drama and Documentary genres continue to be the most popular on the silver screen, despite the constantly changing nature of the film industry. According to the graph showing the Number of movies per Genre and year, the Drama and Documentary genres are the most popular, with around 10,000 films made annually in the latter part of the 2010s alone. The Action and Adventure genres, on the other hand, which are recognized for their heart-pounding excitement and breathtaking visuals, only account for a small portion of the total production at roughly 1,000 films each. This striking contrast highlights the complex forces at work in the film industry, where producing Action/Adventure films calls for an enormous amount of money, time, and effort. In contrast to its Drama counterparts, which thrive on personal character relationships and subtle storytelling.

Besides looking only at genres, it might be interesting to see the geographical differences in the world of movies. In the following world map, we can see how some specific measures in the movie industry differ around the world.

<iframe src="worldMapNew.html" width="100%" height="550" style="border:none;"></iframe>

Considering the amount of total movies, a country has produced, we can see that the USA are clearly the biggest player, with more than four times the amount of total movies than France, the second place in this ranking. We have to take into account here, that The Movie Database TMBD is a company from Calgary, Alberta (Canada) that has easier access to western (not the genre) movies, and e.g. movies form the former Soviet Union, China or India can only be grasped to a lower extent. Nonetheless, the US american dominancy can not be refused in this setting. Furthermore, also have to take into account that the countries here are the production countries of a movie, so the movie itself can have its origins in one country, but also produce in another one.

<iframe src="average_runtime_over_decadesNew.html" width="100%" height="550" style="border:none;"></iframe>

The length of movies are changing over time, being well below 20 mins until the 1910s, then tends to increase overall until the 2000s, whereas the time tends to decrease again in the 2010s and 2020s. This might be particularly interesting to research about causes for this trend shift in a qualitative way. The rise of social media during the time of the latest trend shift might be a plausible cause that can be connected to the overall decrease of movie lengths. Through e.g. microstimulations in Instagram Reels or TikToks, we as humans might not be captivated anymore by long-lasting, never-ending plots, but want to be entertained in a short and concise manner. But not only the signs of our time can have an influence on the playtime, the cultural dimension is also a crucial part of that, as countries like e.g. India tends to generally have longer movie durations than e.g. recently Brazil, which tends to be on the lower end. So all in all we can see, that there many aspects of our society (generational, geographical, etc.) that might be mirrored in our movie data.

Before, we took a look at the single genres, then at some geographical data, and now after we got some insights about that, we want to get back to the genres in more detail to see what is going on with the perception of movies per genre over time, but also about financial data regarding each genre.

<iframe src="tSeries.html" width="100%" height="600" style="border:none;"></iframe>
In this graph, showing genres and their ratings, we can see the difference between the animation and the horror genre over time (other genres are selectable by clicking on the legend). We can observe, that especially before 1940 the horror genre tends to be higer rated than animation movies. This trend shifts quite notably in the ealry 1980's, where the animation clearly outrates the horror genre. The [US animation explosion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_animation#1980s) and deregulation of childrens cartoons by the Reagan administration could have had an influence on that, and might have been the starting shot for a spread and popularity increase in the animation genre. This might give us an idea, that the way how a society behaves is often determined by the frameworks in which a society lives. Would the animation boom have happened if there has not been this deregulation, would war movies be less interesting for us if the world would not be scared by two big world wars and a multitude of previous and past wars that have happened or ar still taking place. In which other ways did those occurances influence our society. Are we missing out on a huge boom that could have happened right now but the specific frameworks are not given? Those frameworks are also determined by different cultures. 
<iframe src="time_series_budget.html" width="100%" height="600" style="border:none;"></iframe>
When it comes to budget allocation, Action and Adventure films dominate even the highly regarded Drama genre. Despite Drama being the most “beloved” genre for the movie industry in terms of quantity, Action and Adventure genre seems to be the Genre where the biggest financial efforts are put in due to their immensely high budgets. Despite 2020 where the industry saw a significant hit to their spending due to COVID-19 pandemic being present, the Action genre has skyrocketed in terms of Budget overall budget. It is quite fascinating that even though there are 10 times more Drama movies each year, Action movies still have almost double the budget in some years, making it a clear choice for the industry as Action and Adventure genres seem quite appealing for investment. 
To give an example, in the early 2000s the Lord of the Ring trilogy (assigned to Fantasy, Asventure, Action) was published during the era of the financial rise of the Action and Adventure segment. It is estimated that the trilogy had costs up to around $281 million and made the staggering amount $2.9 billion in worldwide box office.
<iframe src="time_series_revenue.html" width="100%" height="600" style="border:none;"></iframe>

When it comes to revenue, the true return on investment of the movie industry shines through. The prevalence of the Action and Adventure genre in terms of revenue is considerable. It seems like the movie industry has found the "golden goose" of genres. The resounding success of action-based movies underscores their enduring appeal to the public. Taking into consideration all the hard work, the huge productions, the immense budgets, and the months, not to mention years, it takes for a movie to be made, the Action genre appears to be the most lucrative in terms of box office revenue. We can clearly understand why. Action and Adventure genres encompass every emotion that can be transferred from a movie to the audience. By building fast-paced scenes, stunning CGI-created scenery, and legendary plots, they draw audiences to movie theaters in droves. The complexity hidden within these genres often triumphs over others that are simpler, more blunt, and more straightforward. 

In the beginning, we talked about why the "War" genre could be rated the best genre amongst all. Getting the excitement while not having to bear the real risk dying. This can be conveyed to the Action section. However, the difference here is, that, when looking at the Network graph at the beginning, the Actione genre is more in the center and closely connected to other big genres, while the War genre is close to the border and quite far away from other genres. This makes the Action genre way more accessible for a larger audience, while having still havin all the advantages of the War genre, that might have lead to the high ranking there.

The basis for why the Action/Adventure genre is the "golden goose" in the movie industry is based on several factors, for which we could investigate some in our previous analysis. To conclude this work, we find the reason for the evolving of a "golden goose" so interesting, as we can transfer those realizations to other states in our society. The most successfully entertainment, behaviour, social characteristic, is always the one that gives us low-risk excitement and entertainment (comparison to war genre), while covering a large audience and being widely accepted (Action genre closely connected to others), that sells the best (Actions/Adventures financial data over time).

The contribution split for this assignment can be found on the [About](https://nicosrp.github.io/dtu-socialdataproject-movies/about/) page.